I want to bring in CNN's Katie Bo Lillis.
She's got new reporting that U.S.
intelligence did have some warnings
about a prospect
of more violence here from Hamas.
Just days before Saturday's
surprise attack came out.
What did these reports say?
How specific were they?
Yeah, so, Anderson, what we have learned
is that the intelligence community
was circulating
a pair
of two separate intelligence assessments
just in the days leading into October
seven, a devastating attack.
One of them on September 28th
warned based on
multiple streams of intelligence
that Hamas was poised to escalate
with some cross-border
rocket fire into Israel.
A separate October 5th wire from the CIA
warned sort of generally
of the of increasing possibility
by the increasing
possibility of violence by Hamas.
But, Anderson,
I think
what's really important
to understand here
is that
none of these two
none of neither of these two reports
provided any sort of specific
tactical detail
about the size, scope, scale
brutality of the attack
that actually did occur on October seven.
So they were these sort of
kind of high level
warnings that, you know, look,
that the tensions in between
sort of Palestinian militant groups
and and Israel are growing.
There's an increased possibility
for violence,
but they weren't offering
any sort of specific evidence
of the planning
for the attack that actually unfolded
on Saturday.
Do we know
if those reports were passed
on to Israeli intelligence
or I mean,
it sounds like
it didn't really sound
any particular alarm bells
because it kind of sounded like, well,
there may be more rocket attacks,
but not nothing really too specific.
Yeah.
So this is the
the important thing to understand.
The nuance here,
to understand
here, Anderson, is
there's a big difference
in between sort of strategic warning
and kind of more kind of tactical
warning about, okay, here's
exactly what's about to happen.
And so this was certainly kind of
in the in the camp of strategic warning.
Right.
And I think
based on what our sources
are telling us,
for a lot of officials
who were reading this intelligence,
you know,
they were interpreting it
correctly is like,
look, there's, you know,
heightened tensions in the region.
There's something to be concerned about.
Something could happen here.
But they
they were sort of viewing this as likely
another round of cross-border
rocket fire.
You know,
maybe the Iron Dome intercepts
some missiles, maybe Israel retaliates.
You know,
maybe we even see something as dramatic
as the clash that took place in 20, 21
between Hamas and Israel.
But they weren't in any way
sort of imagining that these warnings
were indicating
something of the size and scale
of what we did see on Saturday.
As for whether or not this was shared
with Israeli officials,
but because the United States
doesn't do a lot of its own
intelligence collection inside Gaza,
it really
relies on Israel
to do a lot of that sort of raw
reporting and a lot of that collection.
It just sort of takes the information
and then analyzes it for itself.
Many of the officials that we spoke
to said it wouldn't necessarily
be indicated for the U.S.
to sort of turn around
and share these reports
or share these sort of assessments
with Israel.
Again,
because much of the raw information
in these intelligence assessments
was coming from Israel in the first place
and Israel wasn't
raising these alarm
bells with the United States
Katie Butler, those
appreciate the reporting. Thank you.
Joining me now
to talk
more about this
and other things happening in
the region is Mark Esper.
He was defense secretary
under President Trump,
is author of the book
A Sacred Oath
Memoirs of a Secretary of Defense
during Extraordinary Times.
Secretary Esper,
appreciate you joining us.
First of all, what do you make of this,
this new information about U.S.
intelligence warning
that something
may be happening,
some uptick, not too specific.
What do you.
Should it have been caught?
Should that have raised more alarms?
It's very interesting.
I'm not surprised that we had some type
of intelligence at that level.
I am a little surprised that there
wasn't more preparation
taking taking on the Israeli end,
if you will, to,
you know,
heighten the security level
along the fence line, the border line
between Israel and Gaza.
I think there have been two failures.
If you look at the situation
now, one has been
the intelligence failure.
But the second one is
a military readiness failure.
To
step up
patrols, surveillance
or whatnot along the along the border.
So that look, that
there will be time for that later.
But that's kind of what jumps to my mind
when we talk about this
Yeah.
And as you said,
I mean, time for that later.
But CNN did do a report
just the board was looking at
what the Hamas, the training videos
they were putting out
and geolocated a site that they built
which mirrored a Israeli
settler community
that they were doing
training on
that was very close to one of the major
border crossings
and was visible from the air.
It's remarkable
that that Israel did not pick up
any real signs of this operation,
which was clearly planned
for a very long period of time
involving many, many different people.
Yeah, that was a very interesting report.
And I read it with some
a good deal of curiosity
that it would go back that far.
And it was should have been visible.
Like I said,
I think there will be time later
they'll go back and really dig into this.
I think the immediate question
when you
look at these pieces of information
that should have been assessed is clearly
there was a blind spot. Blind spot.
And as you go into this next phase
where you're looking
at a military incursion into Gaza
and maybe some other things,
I do think you want to make a quick check
to make sure that this blind spots
are no longer there.
And so I think there is a need
for an immediate assessment
as to what happened and why.
And then you can dig later, kind of
pull each and every thread later.
But that would be
my concern is
what what didn't
we see over the past year
and why didn't we see it
and have we rectified that
before we step into these next
phases of the operation?
I want to ask
you what
you think about the idea
of of a million
residents in Gaza moving south
in a 24 hour period, which is what Israel
is is
telling people to do,
they dropping leaflets.
Do you have a number of humanitarian
organizations saying this is impossible
it's going to lead
to catastrophic consequences?
Hamas is saying don't leave.
I understand
militarily why
they would not want
the civilian population to leave.
They want to use them
as much as possible as human shields
Have you seen mass migrations of people
like that?
Is that possible?
Moving a million
people in 24 hours is a difficult task.
But I've also never seen
a military on the cusp of an invasion
give a warning
to the adversaries that they're coming in
and to allow cities in some time,
if you will, to flee.
Look, it's a tough situation.
It was a situation
brought on by these atrocious, terrible,
barbaric terrorist acts
by Hamas, killing over 1300
Israelis, murdering, raping
slaughtering children, the elderly.
And now on top of that.
We know that
we have 130 250 hostages in Gaza.
I'd like to see these U.N.
agencies come out and demand
that Hamas release the hostages.
That would be a great gesture as well.
But look, it's a tough situation.
Israel has every right to proceed,
and I think they'll do so professionally.
And I think they've given fair warning.
And then I think, look,
I'm in favor
of opening up a humanitarian corridor
in the south,
but I would limit that to women, children
and the elderly
and try and address
that side of the problem. That way.
In terms of the fight ahead.
How difficult
do you think it's going to be?
Obviously,
there's the civilian component.
There's the hostages to think about
and just operating
in an urban environment like Gaza City.
I mean, it is a a warren of streets
and it is densely packed.
It's
how difficult
from your perspective is it?
Very difficult.
You know,
first of all, at the strategic level,
every every day or moment, the passes
you have to make sure
that you don't create a second
front with Hezbollah in the north. Right.
You don't want to fight
two fronts at the same time.
Of course, on top of that,
as we already addressed,
you have hostages.
And so will Hamas
follow through on their threats to begin
executing hostages?
Israelis and Americans, by the way,
we think they have a few Americans
as a as this proceeds
at the tactical level,
urban warfare is very, very difficult.
I know from my time in the Army
during the Gulf War, as we faced
urban areas,
it can consume a lot of troops
very quickly.
So I think part of what
Israel is doing right now
by flattening buildings and pummeling
the area is really trying to reduce
the amount
of places and spaces
and floors and doors.
Every place
that Hamas can hide
to ambush
Israeli troops
as they come through
and try and clear out the areas
they try to uncover
you know,
the subterranean networks
that Hamas has built underneath Gaza.
But it's it's it's really difficult.
It can consume a lot of troops
even if they're not killed or injured.
You just have to leave troops
behind to protect the space.
Part of my concern here
is that maybe the lack of action
by Hezbollah in the north
isn't
because they've made a strategic decision
to sit the conflict out,
but maybe they made
an operational decision
to execute some
to to execute some patience
and wait
until the IDF gets really entrenched
in Gaza.
It's bogged down.
And then they start,
you know, something in the north.
And that would be an operational matter,
which I'm
sure the IDF is considering
very carefully. As well.
Yeah.
Former Defense Secretary Mark Esper,
thank you for your time.